Chapter 6: Message inspection (#91)
Web3NL/motoko-book: src/advanced-concepts/system-apis/message-inspection.md

# Message Inspection

A running canister on the Internet Computer (IC) can receive calls to its [_public shared functions_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) that may take a [_message object_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/principals-and-authentication.html#caller-authenticating-public-shared-functions) that contains information about the _function call_. The function could for example implement [_caller authentication_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/principals-and-authentication.html#caller-authenticating-public-shared-functions) based on the information provided in the message object.

> Additionally, the IC provides _message inspection_ functionality to inspect [_update_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-update) or [_oneway_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-oneway) calls and either _accept_ or _decline_ the call _before_ running a public shared function.

Reviewer: https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/motoko/main/message-inspection actually contains a query method, `read`, to illustrate this corner case.

https://github.com/dfinity/interface-spec/blob/master/spec/index.adoc#nomenclature

Methods can be declared as update or query methods.
Ingress calls can be made as update calls (to both update and query methods), or a query calls (only to query methods).

Message inspection applies to ingress update calls (and can invoke either update or query methods).

At least, that's how I read the spec.

> **NOTE**  
> _Message inspection is executed by a [single replica](#message-inspection-vs-caller-identifying-functions) and does not provide the full security guarantees of going through consensus._

## The `inspect` system function

> In Motoko, this functionality can be implemented as a _system function_ called `inspect`. This function takes an [object](/common-programming-concepts/objects-and-classes/objects.html) as an argument and returns a `Bool` value. If we _name_ the object argument `args`, then the _function signature_ looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Motoko, this functionality can be implemented as a _system function_ called `inspect`. This function takes an [object](/common-programming-concepts/objects-and-classes/objects.html) as an argument and returns a `Bool` value. If we _name_ the object argument `args`, then the _function signature_ looks like this:
```

```motoko
system func inspect(args) : Bool
```

> Note that the [return type](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#shared-types) is NOT `async`. Also, this function CAN NOT update the [state of the actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the [return type](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#shared-types) is NOT `async`. Also, this function CANNOT update the [state of the actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/basic-memory-persistence.html).
```
`can not` is legal english, but I think most just use `cannot`

### How it works

> The `inspect` function is run before any call to an [_update_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-update) or [_oneway_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-oneway) function of an [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html). The call to the [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) is then _inspected_ by the `inspect` system function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `inspect` function is run before any external update call, via an IC ingress message, to an [_update_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-update) or [_oneway_](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-oneway) or [_query](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-query) function of an [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html). The call to the [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) is then _inspected_ by the `inspect` system function.

Note that `query` methods can be called using query calls (more common) or update calls (less common). The latter calls are slower but more trustworthy - they require consensus and incur are charged in cycles. Update calls to query methods are protected by message inspection too, but query calls are not protected.
```

The argument to the `inspect` function (an object we call `args` in the function signature above) is provided by the IC and contains information about:

> - The [public shared function](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) that is being called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The name of [public shared function](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) that is being called, and a function to obtains its argument.
```

- The [caller](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/principals-and-authentication.html#caller-authenticating-public-shared-functions) of the function
- The _binary content_ of the _message argument_.

The `inspect` function may examine this information about the call and decide to either _accept_ or _decline_ the call by returning either `true` or `false` respectively.

> **NOTE**  

> > _Calls to either [query functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-query), [other canisters](/advanced-concepts/async-programming/cross-canister-calls-and-rollbacks.html) or the [management canister](/common-internet-computer-canisters/ic-management-canister.html) are NOT inspected by the `inspect` system function._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> _Ingress query calls to [query functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-query) and any calls from [other canisters](/advanced-concepts/async-programming/cross-canister-calls-and-rollbacks.html)  are NOT inspected by the `inspect` system function._
```
Not sure it's worth mentioning the management canister here and you can't author its inspect message anyway.

### The `inspect` function argument

The argument to the `inspect` system function is provided by the IC. The type of this argument depends on the [type of the actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#actor-type). Lets consider an [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) of the following [actor type](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#actor-type):

```motoko
{{#include _mo/message-inspection1.mo:a}}
```

The functions `f1` and `f2` are _update_ functions and `f3` is a _oneway_ function. Also, `f2` takes a `Nat` argument and `f3` takes a `Text` argument.

The argument to the `inspect` system function (which we call `args` in this example) for this specific [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) will be an object of the following type:

```motoko
{{#include _mo/message-inspection1.mo:b}}
```

> This object contains three fields with _predefined_ names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This record contains three fields with _predefined_ names:
```

- The `caller` field is always of type `Principal`.
- The `arg` field is always of type `Blob`.
- The `msg` field is always a [variant](/common-programming-concepts/types/variants.html) type and its fields will depend on the [type of the actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#actor-type) that this `inspect` function is defined in.

> ### The `msg` variant and 'function-variable-accessor' functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The `msg` variant and 'function-argument-accessor' functions
```

The `msg` [variant](/common-programming-concepts/types/variants.html) inside the argument for the `inspect` system function will have a field for every public shared function of the [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html). The variant _field names_ `#f1`, `#f2` and `#f3` correspond the the _function names_ `f1`, `f2` and `f3`.

> But the _associated types_ for the variant fields **ARE NOT** the types of the [actor functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors). Instead, the types of the variant fields `#f1`, `#f2` and `#f3` are 'function-variable-accessor' functions that we could call inside the `inspect` system function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But the _associated types_ for the variant fields **ARE NOT** the types of the [actor functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors). Instead, the types of the variant fields `#f1`, `#f2` and `#f3` are 'function-argument-accessor' functions that we can call, if needed, inside the `inspect` system function.
```

> In our example these 'function-variable-accessor' function types are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our example these 'function-argument-accessor' function types are:
```

```motoko
() -> ();
() -> Nat;
() -> Text;
```

> These functions return the variable arguments that were supplied during the call to the public shared function. Thus, they always have unit argument types and return the variable type of the called function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These functions return the arguments that were supplied during the call to the public shared function. They always have unit argument type but return the argument type of the corresponding shared function. The return type of each accessor thus depends on the shared function that it is inspecting.
```

For example function `f2` takes a `Nat`. If we wanted to _inspect_ this value, we could call the _associated function_ of variant `#f2`, which is of type `() -> Nat`. This function will provide the actual argument passed in the call to the public shared function.

## Actor with Message Inspection

Lets implement the `inspect` system function for the example [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) given above:

```motoko
{{#include _mo/message-inspection.mo}}
```

We implemented an actor that _inspects_ any call to its [public shared functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) and performs checks on _update_ and _oneway_ functions before they are called.

First, the `Principal` module is imported and the [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) is declared with three [public shared functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) `f1`, `f2` and `f3`.

> Then, we defined `CallArgs` as the object type of the _expected_ argument to the `inspect` system function. We then declare the system function and use `CallArgs` to annotate the `args` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, we defined `CallArgs` as the record type of the _expected_ argument to the `inspect` system function. We then declare the system function and use `CallArgs` to annotate the `args` argument.
```

We can now access all the information for any function call inside the `inspect` function through the _chosen_ name `args`. (We could have chosen any other name)

Inside `inspect` we first check whether the `caller` field of `args`, which is a `Principal`, is equal to the anonymous principal. If so, then `inspect` returns `false` and the call is _rejected_. Anonymous principals can't call any functions of this [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html).

> Another check is performed on the size of the `arg` field value of our `args` object. If the _binary message argument_ is larger than `1024` bytes, then the call is _rejected_ by returning `false` once more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another check is performed on the size of the `arg` field value of our `args` record. If the _binary message argument_ is larger than `1024` bytes, then the call is _rejected_ by returning `false` once more.
```

Our `inspect` implementation ends with a switch expression that checks every case of the `msg` variant inside `args`.

In the case function `f1` is called, we ignore the possible arguments supplied to it by using the wildcard `_` for the 'function-variable-accessor' function and always _accept_ the call by always returning `true`.

> In case function `f2` is called, we bind the 'function-variable-accessor' function to the local name `f2Args` and run it to get the value of the argument to `f2`, which is a `Nat`. If this value is smaller then `100`, we _accept_ the call, otherwise we _reject_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case function `f2` is called, we bind the 'function-argument-accessor' function to the local name `f2Args` and run it to get the value of the argument to `f2`, which is a `Nat`. If this value is smaller then `100`, we _accept_ the call, otherwise we _reject_.
```

> In case function `f3` is called, we bind the 'function-variable-accessor' function to the local name `f3Args` and run it to get the value of the argument to `f3`, which is a `Text`. If this value is equal to `"some text"`, we _accept_ the call, otherwise we _reject_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case function `f3` is called, we bind the 'function-argument-accessor' function to the local name `f3Args` and run it to get the value of the argument to `f3`, which is a `Text`. If this value is equal to `"some text"`, we _accept_ the call, otherwise we _reject_.
```

## Pattern matching and field renaming

Instead of defining the type `CallArgs` beforehand and referring to the object argument `args` by name, we could use [_pattern matching_](/common-programming-concepts/pattern-matching.html) and rename the fields in the function signature:

```motoko
{{#include _mo/message-inspection2.mo:a}}
```

> We now declared `inspect` with an _object literal_ as the argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now declared `inspect` with an _record pattern_ as the argument.
```

Inside the function, we switch on `msg` and only handle the case where function `f2` is called. If the variable value to `f2` is less than `100`, we _accept_, otherwise we _reject_ the call.

In all other cases, we check whether `id` is the anonymous principal. If it is, we _reject_, otherwise we _accept_ the call.

## Message inspection vs Caller identifying functions

The `inspect` system function should not solely be used for _secure access control_ to [actors](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html). It may be used to _reject_ possibly unwanted calls to an [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) before they are executed. Without message inspection, all calls are accepted by default, executed and charged for in [cycles](/project-deployment/cycles-and-icp.html).

Message inspection is executed by a single replica (without full consensus, like a [query call](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors)) and its result could be spoofed by a malicious boundary node.

_Secure access control_ checks can only be performed by:

> 1. Implementing [public shared functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) in an [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) which implement the [caller identifying](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/principals-and-authentication.html#caller-authenticating-public-shared-functions) message object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Implementing [public shared functions](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html#public-shared-functions-in-actors) in an [actor](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/actors.html) which implement the [caller identification](/internet-computer-programming-concepts/principals-and-authentication.html#caller-authenticating-public-shared-functions) pattern.
```
(not sure about this).
